Yeah like Rachel said, I'm Hlynur Hallgrímsson. I'm a senior data scientist
within the Office of Data Services, which is the centralized data science team
here in the City of Reykjavík. I used to be an economist, still I'm a
chartered economist, but I've been working as a data scientist since 2016
and a data analyst before that. I joined the City of Reykjavík data science team
in March of 2020, which was a short welcome because the second week of my
employment we all got sent home due to COVID. So it's been like a rather
remote back and forth, back and forth between remote and just in the office
since then. But the data science team is new. It was created in 2019, the end of
2019, and we're a small team. So there's only six of us and although sometimes we
do like data products from start to finish, other times we are essentially
brought in to help with projects in other departments within the City of
Reykjavík. But essentially our clients are other departments within the city. So
I'm going to talk to you about swimming pools and a fun data science project
that has to do with our swimming pools. So Reykjavík accounts for a lot of, a large
share rather, of Iceland's population or about 36%. So the population of Iceland
is 375,000 people, but in Reykjavík there are 135,000. And if you count
the whole capital region, like the suburbs, which are other municipalities,
they are actually like 64% of all Icelanders, like the capital region. And
we're pretty crazy about our swimming pools. So this is going to be about a
project that is trying to show people how crowded each swimming pool is.
But it's also just about how these are hard in data science. And it's not like
that, you know, training the most perfect machine learning model is hard. It's just
like the project logistics and what we've come to call group
intercommunication. That's, you know, that's difficult sometimes. But so we
have geothermal resources in the form of hot water. So we pump the water from the
ground at 80 degrees Celsius. So the hot water in Iceland is like incredibly cheap,
which is like one of the reasons why we have these pools. They're actually, you
know, reasonably, they're not like this super fancy thing. It's just everybody
goes to a swimming pool. And also throughout the 20th century, one of the
five people in Iceland was on average working in fishing. So like a big part of,
you know, just our coming of age story as people is going to mandatory swimming
classes through first to 10th grade. And like, yeah, I noted that it's roughly 400
hours of mandatory swimming, which, of course, is like the worst version of
everything. It's the mandatory version. And also, it's just cold and dark. So we
like to get what little sunlight we can in the hot tubs. And we also go to gossip
and talk politics and just socialize. So the idea behind this project is telling
people, being able to convey to people which swimming pools are crowded and which
ones are not. So like since the swimming pools are really popular, people have been
contacting us and asking if there's any way to see, like, is there a website where
I can see like how crowded these are? And the welfare workers have also expressed
that interest for clients that are like susceptible to sensory overload. So that
will be also a cool feature once we implement this. But like a big thing was that a neighboring
town, it's like all about municipality competition. They now offer a website dashboard which shows
you how crowded their two swimming pools are. But in their case, they have staff manually
count the patrons, as far as I'm aware. But also during COVID, swimming pool availability
was cut to 50% of normal capacity for certain periods. So when that became clear, we realized,
OK, this is something that we have to do, not just, you know, to. It wasn't like it
went from being like a nice to have to something that we wanted to work on.
So this is something that comes from the Department of Sports and Leisure within the city of Reykjavik.
And this is their pitch, but it's not a direct quote. So they say, OK, so we've updated
the gates or the turnstiles at our swimming pools to modern electronic turnstiles. With
these modern gates, we can now get information on how many people are at each swimming pool
through an API, an application programming interface. And their question is, can you
help us present this data showing how crowded each pool is?
So this is essentially, at that point, this is just like, honestly, just like we figured
it's a simple shaggy app and just a question of database. How are we going to present this?
If like if you can just access the data that tells us the number of current visitors for
each pool. So like I said, this is a project that is spearheaded by the Department of Sports
and Leisure. They come to the centralized data science team to ask for our help. But
with regards to getting the data, this is, of course, a little bit more complex because
the Department of Sports and Leisure has to deal with the Icelandic partner to the manufacturer
of the gates. And they are our contact partner for the actual vendor, the gate manufacturer.
And this is my train of thought. But still, it should be pretty straightforward once we
get the data right. And the clown face there is put for emphasis.
So at the start of the project, I envision this as a rather simple project. You read
the data from the API using the HTTR package. Of course, we're going to be doing some data
cleaning using the tidy version per. So we'll visualize with ggplot, make that visualization
interactive with ggraft probably, and then make that into a reactive Shiny app and deploy
it to either Shinyapps.io or RStudio Connect. And this, of course, is a tragic miscalculation
on my part because I'm assuming that, OK, the data might take some time because of this
communication. It's hard to make another team in a company twice removed from you care
about your product as much as you do, essentially. So they are not going to be with the internal
fire that we have for this project at the data science team.
So with the five-item list, I'm assuming a lot of things about the data and the API.
And just before we get into the nitty-gritty of it, simple things, like these projects
can be time-consuming because there are difficult things or complex things, but also the simple
things aren't necessarily simple because different groups have different priorities.
We have other priorities during working on this. The biggest was the COVID dashboard
that we needed to put up and maintain at the same time that we were starting work on this.
And then there's group intercommunication and forced communication protocols is kind
of maybe a bad choice of words, but essentially it's like we need to talk to the Icelandic
partner and they talk to the venture because essentially the Icelandic partner is the company
we buy the solution from.
And then there's lawyer stuff. When lawyers between maybe the city of Reykjavik and the
venture start talking, you can, you know, things just slow down.
So this is a timeline and it's absolutely horrible if you look at it. So like the first
idea to like, we should maybe do this, do this thing. It's in February of 2020. And
there's like this request for data sent out. Hey, can we access this API? And no, lots
of emails back and forth. And then we show you the emails. So like maybe just 20 emails
from one like thread of emails that I had up, but it's not accounting for like meetings
and stuff like that. But then you take into account like that between March and June,
we did not have our eyes on this particular ball because we were focusing on putting up
the COVID dashboard and maintaining that and keeping that correct. But during the summer,
we start to push for more like, what about this data? We asked, you know, you said this,
can you maybe look into that? And in September, we come to the conclusion like, OK, you can
get this data and here's how it would happen. But according to our lawyers, according to
our lawyers, you'd have to pay a fee to access this API. And then the lawyers from Sports
and Leisure say, no, no, no. According to our interpretation of this contract, we don't
actually have to pay this fee you're talking about. So that gets in the way. But after
Christmas, things start growing and we get the data. But then we actually get the data.
This is Friday, last Friday. And if you look at this chart, you can see that for five of
the six swimming pools in question, these are like strictly increasing. These aren't
showing us like how many visitors are at each swimming pool. And it comes down to the fact
that for five of these six pools, like the hardware isn't able to count out. It only
counts in. But for the six swimming pools, which you see there in the left bottom corner,
it also looks kind of weird. And we'll get into that in a bit. But essentially, you can
see that it's not strictly increasing. So it turns out, like I said, the gate hardware
for these five pools can only count visitors into the pool. So current visitors isn't current
visitors. It's the cumulative sum of total visitors up to that point during the day,
like at the point of time where we sent the GET request to the API.
Okay. There's more. If you look at Lööwätterslöög, like this looks rather normal. It passes
the first eyeball test. Like, okay, this looks like actual data. But it's actually super
weird if you look at like the end of the day. There are no people leaving the swimming pool,
but at the end of the day. So when the pool closes, and half an hour after the pool closes,
there are still around 175 people in the swimming pool according to the counter. And we'll get
to that a bit later. But essentially, from this API, we don't know when the people leave.
We know when people come into the swimming pool, provided we are querying the API. So
we ask ourselves, what if we model the duration of each visitor's stay? Or rather, each five-minute
intervals, like for all the visitors in each five-minute interval, because we're running
the GET request to the API every five minutes. And that way we can essentially get, if we
put five-minute intervals between the GET requests, we can say, okay, here are between
6.30 and 6.35, there were 20 people that entered our Bärlaug pool. If we just know how long
on average these people would stay in the pool before leaving, we could essentially
put together a data set that says, okay, here's an approximation of how many people are at
our Bärlaug at the moment. The big idea is that we request historical data through the
Icelandic vendor. And I, like I said, but maybe it wasn't clear, so I'll reiterate,
has in and out data. Well, it's not perfect. It's just that the other five swimming pools
only have in data. And if two assumptions hold, that people's stays are not inherently
different in duration between Løvetalsløg and the other pools, and the second assumption
that people's stays are not inherently different in duration between people who are counted
out and people who are not counted out of Løvetalsløg, which we figured out is essentially
the problem. So, like the real kicker is that some people are counted out of Løvetalsløg,
but not all. But if these assumptions hold and we get the historical data, we figure
we can train a model on historical Løvetalsløg stay durations of the people that are actually
counted out, and then predict durations onto the live API data for the other five pools.
And that's what we did. And this is essentially like the sketch of how we did that. So, within
RStudio Connect, we have an R Markdown document that is scheduled to run every five minutes.
It gets the data from the live API, and it also gets data from a PIN. We use the PINs
package. It reads in the end data that has essentially been read before. Okay. This is
a terrible way to explain it. Sorry. Okay. So, essentially, every five minutes, we read
the live data. But also, every five minutes, we check for other, like the historical, not
the historical data that we were hoping to get from the vendor, but like every other
API call. We've saved that to a PIN that we pinned to the RStudio Connect board, and then
we join those together. So, we can then rewrite over the PIN. And we then create a Shiny app,
which reads like, let's say for today, if the Shiny app were to look at this end data,
it would have an account of all, like, all the, like, point in time counts for every
pool. And the Shiny app then takes another pinned object, which is a linear model, and
then predicts when these people would leave. So, you can present within the Shiny app an
estimate of how many people are there. And just to go into the, like, what we essentially
did, we started just on a local machine. And once we've got access to historical data from
the vendor, which they save on Google Cloud, we read that data from BigQuery using the
big RQuery package. But now we've used, now we use the RStudio Professional Drivers and
the DPI package. We fit a linear model for predicting the duration. And the predictors
are, is it a weekend? How, like, how long since the summer solstice, or how long until
the summer solstice? And then we have a natural spline term of hours. And we use seven knots
for the spline term. And it's, we toyed around with it, but essentially we based the, like,
the number of knots on just the staff knowledge. So, it's, we're saying it's different, the
duration is influenced by, of course, what time of day it is. And we've fit the knots
for the spline at these points in time because they say, okay, it's different between 6.30
and 9. So, put a knot between, put a knot at 6.30 and another knot at 9. And then they
say, but also during the, during lunch hours, people stay, like, a much shorter time because
these are people that have maybe 45 minutes or an hour for lunch, if they're very lucky.
And they run to the swimming pool to, you know, get a swimming. And these people stay
for a short time. So, the, essentially, the, it's appropriate to fit a knot around the
lunch time and so on. So, it's, this is not something that we, like, were, we didn't have,
like, some fitting where it was, you know, decided by an algorithm. We just talk to people,
just to make sense. And then we evaluated different combinations of knots on the training set.
So, like I said, the R Markdown document is scheduled to read data from the API,
keep that data, and wrangle it into a table, also read data from the in dataset pin,
and then append the cleaned API data table to the in dataset, and then pin that updated
in dataset to the RStudio part, which is what I was trying to show here. So,
we have then a Shiny application that just reads the in dataset pin, reads the model pin,
which we have deployed to RStudio Connect from our, we trained it on our local machine,
but we deploy it to RStudio Connect, and then we run a predict function for that to create an
estimate of current visitors. So, this is an example of that. This is data from September,
and this is rather reasonable for the five tools that we are focusing on, but
l'Eau de Fleur is still not good, and we essentially, we tried to do some things,
which I'm not going to go into here. We tried another linear model to correct l'Eau de Fleur.
It didn't work out, and the way we found out that it didn't work out was we essentially
gave this app to the managers of the swimming pools to evaluate, and they said,
these five pools, they're okay. They're actually, like, they were really happy with it,
but l'Eau de Fleur, it wasn't even close. So, that's something we have to,
we still have to figure out. But, like, why is this a cool thing? Because, in my opinion,
it's super cool because it's all R and RStudio Connect. So, like, we're an R shop here at the
data science team, and if it's all R, we can move at our own pace, and for this part of the project,
there were no outside constraints or, you know, inefficiencies in how we communicate with other
groups, and we also get to run into the problems ourselves, and then we know what to take into
account if parts of the process are outsourced beyond the team, and we've actually had this,
like, a way to explain it is to think about, like, building a car, and I've told Rachel this before.
Essentially, we're thinking about if we are trying to build a car, there are many components
that need to be built, and essentially, we are saying we can put up a fast prototype and do
everything ourselves, and that way, there's no chance of us running into a problem if we outsource
to another team, let's say. You take this part of the project, let's say, in the example of a car,
you create, like, the seats for the car, and then we get that back, and we realize, okay, this didn't
fit, they need to talk to us, but if we just do this ourselves, we run into that problem ourselves,
and when we've built, like, a rather, you know, crummy version of the car as, like, a minimum
viable product, we can then say, okay, we need to outsource this thing, we need to follow protocols
with regards to reading the API, and then we outsource that to our IT team, but then we can
say, here's what we ran into, and here's what you need to take into account, and that way,
we get results so much faster. So, this is our current setup. So, we are not actually reading
from the API using RStudio Connect. Now, it's put into Web Methods, which is an integration platform
which our IT team uses. So, that's just protocol, and it's just, like, super convenient for us
because it gets written to our Azure Data Lake storage, or rather the in data that is created
every five minutes, that gets written to Azure Data Lake, and we can then read that in our
markdown document every five minutes, and then we do a prediction based on the linear model,
which is still just a pin on RStudio Connect, because there's, like, no need to complicate that,
and then we have a prediction table, which is what the Shiny app reads on, like, when you
fire up the Shiny app, you're just reading from one table, which is the, like, the prediction table,
which is a pin on RStudio Connect, a board on RStudio Connect. But, just before we finish up,
I want to talk about Løderfløg, because that's, like, a super interesting problem,
and, like I say here, the data for Løderfløg is absolutely whack, and, like you see,
it's a technical term, and that has everything to do with how nice the staff at Løderfløg are.
So, like I said, it's the only pool that comes in and out, but
when there are, say, school kids who go to their mandatory swimming,
like, let's say there's a row or a queue of 40 school kids trying to leave the swimming pool
after the swimming classes, the staff at Løderfløg is not going to require everybody to
take their, like, their armband, or bracelet, rather, and put it into the machine, which then
counts it, okay, this individual came in, you know, 90 minutes earlier, they're leaving now,
they just open the, like, open the gates, and the kids throw these bracelets into a, like,
into a bucket by the entrance, essentially, and it also has to do with, like, late at night when
there's a lot to do, they don't make people actually wait for, you know, wait their time
in the queue. So, it's all due to kindness, and you can read that phrase, damn you kindness,
you ruined my data, in the voice of the British comedian Richard A. Castor,
and you can do that to yourself. But, so, the things we're trying, of course, the first thing
we wanted to do was just ask the vendor to make changes to the API, to separate the in data from
the out data for Løderfløg, we're still waiting on this, but in the meantime, we have, you know,
because we really want to do the, we really want to get this thing out, we've been working on it
for a long time, so one idea was to use a secondary, like, another counter that is located
by the actual pools in Løderfløg, not by the entrance, but this has proven unfruitful because
it's just a traffic counter, it doesn't say that people are going in this direction or in this
direction, so it's just, we can't tell you how many people are going into the pool and how many
people are going out of the pool. And then, this is like, pardon my English, or rather, pardon my
French for what I'm about to say, but this, like, the next thing feels like something you read on
the Twitter account, Internet of Shit, which is like an internet of things, like, where it roasts
these smart solutions, but there are smart lockers in Løderfløg, but, like, the internet of shit
part is where it's unclear if the firmware can be updated to the most recent version to support live
data, so for the time being, we only have historical data for the smart lockers, which I believe gets
read into a database every night when the pools are closed. So, essentially, we tried a
couple of things that didn't work, we're waiting on the vendor to make changes to the API, and I'm
sure it's going to be, you know, oh, let our lawyers talk to your lawyers about this fee, it'll end up
some, I'm jaded, terribly sorry, but also, before I end, like, this here was a gross oversimplification
where we're only talking to, like, the Icelandic partner to the vendor, there are also gyms that
have access to the pools, so you can go to a gym that's, like, located next to a pool,
and they have separate counters into the pool, so after you've done your workout at the gym,
you can actually walk through some tunnel into the pool area, and we have yet to figure out
how to count those, because that's, we deal with Department of Sports and Leisure, and Department
of Sports and Leisure deals with the owners of the gym, and the owners of the gym talk to some
Icelandic partner to a vendor, which talk to, you know, an international vendor, so it's, like,
a more complex, like, pipeline, essentially, pipeline of information.
So, still to do, we need to account for, like, gym patrons that use the swimming pools at
Løvetalfløg and Beredfoldsfløg, and, like, the final point of this presentation is, of course,
there's going to be something else, but we don't know it yet, so I'd love to take questions on
this. I'm sure, I, yeah, we have 20 minutes, and I'm sure there are some things that I did not
explain properly, so all ears. Thank you so much, Leonard. That was awesome, and I'm just
thinking, if one time here, it would be so cool to be able to just go to a pool right now.
So, there's a lot of great questions that came in on Slido, and so, just so everyone knows,
and Josiah can help me share the link again, you can ask questions there. If you want to put your
name in, I could also call on you to, like, add additional context, too, but I'll start with some
of the anonymous ones, and one was, and quite a few people commented that they really liked that
first visualization you shared, and they said, could you kindly share the R syntax of the first
visualization that showed your email tracking, the day we requested, the day we received?
Okay, yeah, so this is, this presentation is, like, an R markdown presentation, so the timeline,
it's essentially three ggplot graphs, and I can share this, I should have added my GitHub account,
but I'll share this, like, this is, this, oh, I'm terribly sorry, I'm not sharing the screen,
I'm sharing the, I'm sharing the Chrome browser. I can see the presentation screen, okay.
Okay, I'm gonna, I'm gonna share the secondary screen, so I can, like, where's the share screen?
Okay, hopefully, and I can share your,
you can see my, oh, now I can see the code, okay. Okay, so this is, like, this is just the data,
and it's a, like, this is the first ggplot, and it's not just a mess, but I didn't think I'd be
sharing this code, but I'd be happy to, like, data realism, so, yeah, I'll put that on my GitHub,
and Rachel, you can share that. Perfect. Awesome. Thank you. Someone else asked,
is there a live link to the swimming pool dashboard currently?
Not that it's accessible outside, like, the City of Reykjavik team, because we haven't,
because of our problems with Løterslev, currently, there are two apps. One app is for
the managers of the swimming pools, and the other one is, like, the in-progress,
because I hand, like, I make the plain-looking Shiny app, but then we have
Thor, who's a data scientist, a great data scientist there at the City of Reykjavik,
who has, like, this artistic eye, and he makes, like, all the pretty production Shiny apps, so
that one is hopefully, you know, soon to be released, but at the moment, no, it's not accessible.
Thank you. And also, if people have questions you want to ask live as well, I'm just going to
allow people to unmute themselves, too, and if you want to raise your hand, you can jump in, too.
But I will go to the next anonymous question, unless anyone has one you want to ask live.
Okay. One is, did this project initiate any improvements in user tracking,
or is everybody just content with the way you patched the problem and things will stay the same?
I think you maybe mentioned at the end about the API possibly changing.
Yeah, but another thing is that, like, there have been, like,
discussions between Sports and Leisure and the managers of the actual swimming pools with regards
to change, like, it's perfectly acceptable for 40 school children to not be counted out,
but, like, for the later, like, if there's two full-grown adults waiting in queue, like,
you can, they're essentially saying, you know, we'd appreciate if you stop the kindness just a
little bit, and, you know, let these people be counted out. So, that's something that we haven't
seen in the data yet, but provided that, it provided that we fixed the problem,
that we fixed things with, like, once we get the gym data, and then we can say, like,
can we look at this if they were to, like, be more, or rather less kind, let's just say less
kind, now they count people out. Thank you. I love when you talk about, like, the people
behind the data and thinking about, like, who those actual individuals are and what they're
doing as they go about their day. Yeah. Another upvoted question was, could you compare your use
of Plotly and G-Giraffe? Am I pronouncing that package correctly? Did you use both or prefer
one over the other? I actually, I started out using Plotly because I've been using that for
a long time, but then Sol, who's this, you know, artistic data scientist that I mentioned earlier,
he pointed me in the direction of G-Giraffe, and I much prefer that now, because, like,
you just create a G-G plot, and then you wrap it in the G-Giraffe, and it instantly becomes,
like, an interactive visualization, provided you change the, like, the geom part. So,
I like the G-G plots, like, flow to things, and this is, like, a perfect extension to that.
Cool. Thank you. I'd love to hear from other people, too, so you don't have to
just keep hearing my voice. If you want to ask questions live.
I see Gregory, or Gregor, you have a question. Yes. Can you hear me well? Yes, I can.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you, Eleanor, for the great presentation. Actually, I'm an economist, too,
so that's nice to know that I'm not the only one interested in data science,
and I wanted to know how much the city or the public entity is interested in
all what you can provide as data analyst or economist, or, I mean, are there many projects
are willing to put you in, or it's, like, still growing, as you mentioned, because it's new to
them? Awesome question. Thank you. It's actually just, like, skyrocketing. So, like I said,
the data team is relatively new, like, years and 2019, but now, like, at the beginning,
there were, we didn't have these, like, fixed protocols in place, how we did these
projects, but now, just with a little experience, we've been, like, moved into the IT
departments framework for, like, this is the way we accept projects, and this is
how we allocate time to them, and, like, since that, it's become, like,
it's been made clear to the departments within the city of Reykjavik, like,
here's a team of data scientists, if you have an interesting use case or something urgent, which
you want them to do, here's how we would go about getting them in, and it's, like, people are super
interested in doing that, and it has to do with, like, you do one cool thing for, like,
the Department of Schools, and the next, and after that, they're, like, okay, we, like,
they, of course, know, like, the potential, but then, when you hand something off to them,
they see, okay, this is something that's, like, this is something that is now available, it's,
like, real, essentially, so, yeah, like, super, super interested in all things data currently.
Okay, very cool, very cool. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. Jaiwan, I see you asked a question on Slido and put your name there. Can I pass
the mic over to you to add some context there? Yeah, sure. Just wanted to know how the teamwork
or delegation works within your team. Do you face any limitations because you're
in the public space? Yeah, just wondering how the teamwork delegation works.
Yeah, okay, great question. Like, like I said, we're, there's only six of us, so we have our,
like, chief data officer, Inka, and she's, like, the head of the operation, but we have a data
engineer, and we have me, a data scientist, and my, my skill set is mostly geared towards
predictive modeling, but also, you know, analytics, you know, reports something that
needs to be done, and then we have Sorbet, who's, he's, like, a super machine learning engineer
type of data scientist. He's, like, so competent at that, but he's also, like, this,
he's our go-to guy to, like, finalize, you know, shiny apps and do, like, these more complex data
visualizations, map stuff, and things like that, and then we have Siri, who's also a data scientist,
Siri, who's also a data scientist, and she is, she is, like, doing more of the report things
currently, as our, like, our junior scientist, and then we have Grimur, who's also a data
engineer, so we have essentially three data scientists, two engineers, and a chief data
officer, and the tasks that Palli and Grimur, the data engineers, they are split more along the lines
of, like, which departments the data comes from. It's a rather complex conversation, but, like,
between the data scientists, it's more, like, focused on, like, what we're good at,
like, Siri is really good at, not just, you know, shiny applications that are, like, doing reports,
but, like, other things like Power BI and Glyphsense and stuff like that, so, yeah.
Thank you. Saif, I see you have your hand raised as well.
Can I pass it over to you? Thank you, Rachel, for giving me the chance,
and my apologies if I, I might have missed this right in the beginning. What I'm wondering is,
it's quite an interesting project, but the thing that I'm curious about is that what was the,
what's the problem that you're trying to solve with this project, and what was the business
case for this, if there is a strong business case for it? Yeah, so, I didn't show the, yeah,
did I show this slide? I'm not sure if I showed this slide. So, it's essentially, like, the first,
the first thing that, like, sparked this idea was just citizens trying to figure out which
pools were crowded, and sending, you know, calling it to the city offices, is there a way to show
us which, you know, can I tell if Leratofleri is super crowded right now? And it's just this
interest which started the conversation. But then, once we, you know, that idea sparked,
I've also talked to welfare workers within the city of Reykjavik, and they are, like,
essentially, because if they have clients that have, like, are susceptible to sensory overload,
they usually go to, like, really remote swimming pools, like, in the edge of the suburbs,
like, which is not one of the pools in question here, but essentially just to make sure that
they're at a non-crowded pool. And then, like, COVID came, and that's when the project actually,
you know, became an actual project. Although we, like, we don't have 50% capacity now,
it was only for, like, two one-month periods. But that's when there were actually, like, lines
outside the swimming pools, and the idea was if we can get this, you know, up and running fast
enough, we can then show people, okay, this pool is currently too crowded for you to go there,
but here's a pool that is actually, like, not crowded. Sadly, or not sadly, like, it's great
that we don't have these limitations anymore, but, like, we didn't manage to do it within that,
you know, two-month period. So, I guess, going forward, now, that explains a lot, actually.
Thank you. I think I've seen something similar in terms of people trying to check how crowded
the supermarkets are. So, going forward, if you could probably link it with the booking system
for the swimming pool, then you might end up with a really nice business backing for that.
So, no, it's a great project. Thank you. Thank you so much. And, like, that's, like, a five-year
plan, but it's... Well, you already have everything, you know. So, you could possibly do it in a couple
of months' time. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But, like, the booking system is connected to the... So, you can
actually... If we were to, you know, team up with IT, we could actually join forces, and within this
app, you could not only see which pools are, like, which pools are crowded and not crowded,
you could actually, like, buy a ticket. So, yeah, awesome. Thank you. Thank you. Oli has his hand
raised as well, and then I'll go over to some of the other anonymous questions. Hey, Oli.
Hi, Leonard. What is this? Hello, Oli.
Guys, again, and I'd like to add also that the City of Reykjavik is on this
digital transformation journey, and so the requirements are also coming straight from
the business. So, we have these digital leaders scattered around the business, and they know
their stuff, and they come to the data team and the Department of Innovation and Services
with projects that they have prioritized based on, you know, their operational needs.
But, you know, I'm here for a question now, Leonard, and we're really close friends.
Since we're Icelandic, like, everybody knows everybody here. There are, like, five of us here
in Iceland. I should add that Oli is our former Chief Data Officer, which, you know, created this
team of inventors, as I saw someone call it in the chat. Yes, and you certainly are. But,
I'm allowed one difficult question, but I'm not going to answer it.
I want to have a discussion on, like, I think this is super interesting for the people who are
joining this call. So, we're building this prediction model for predicting how many
people are visiting the pools. What's the level of accuracy that is needed for that in terms of,
like, value for the business, for the pool business? So, could you enlighten us on that?
Because we have had this discussion so often, but I'm going to, because I feel that it's super
important for data science projects. Is it valuable to predict whether there are 50 visitors or 51?
Like, is there a difference? Does this change something for me? But isn't the value, like,
predicting whether there are 50 or 500? And I'm actually amazed we're talking about prediction
accuracy in terms of value. Take it away. Thank you, Oli. So, the thing we did, like,
we evaluated these models on training data, but we don't have test data because we're not going to
ask the staff there to, you know, count every five minutes and create a test data set for us.
But rather, what we did was leave it up to the managers and the staff of the swimming pools
to look at the app. And essentially, they would be, like, the gauge if this is accurate enough
for them. And the thing is, they, like, one case where they were doing, like, these daily spot
checks. Okay, it's 2 p.m. You walk around the swimming pool and tell me how many people there
are, and we can then compare that to this app that this data science team has given us. And
what they found out was, like, it was, like, well within their, like, margin of reasonable accuracy
because it, like Oli alluded to, it doesn't matter if there are 70 or 75 people at the
swimming pool, but it does matter if it's 75 or 200 people. So, like, one example was, like,
we did the spot check. It was 72, but the model showed 76. We're completely fine with that.
And, you know, so that essentially, like, and this is what made it fun because, as Oli knows,
at my last place of employment, I was, like, always, you know, doing these
increasingly complex machine learning algorithms just to get, like, you know, 0.07% accuracy
increases. And that's, like, that's not the fun stuff. But, like, the fun stuff is, you know,
doing a project, like, a complete project and saying, okay, here's, like, this, here's our
estimate, and we're not trying to, you know, what is it, squeeze blood out of a stone. I'm
not sure if that's even an English expression. It is in Icelandic. So, so it's, yeah, it's fun.
It's all I'm going to say. Like, working on a project that it's, it doesn't matter if it's
72 or 76. It's just well within the margin. It's all about bringing the, like, correct level of
accuracy for value, the value for the business. Like you mentioned in the, in the talk, and I
really like that, is, like, we evaluate our models through discussions with, with our stakeholders.
And I thought that was cool. And it was an awesome presentation, Linus. Thank you. You
are awesome. Thank you, Oli. You're awesome, Oli. Good to see you again. Thank you so much.
So a few other anonymous questions in here, if it's okay, if we go over a little bit.
Do you have to run? Fine with me, fine with me. Okay. Awesome. And for anybody who missed it,
I'll share the recording as well, so they can get their answers, too. But one was, what, was it hard
to set up the Azure or AWS, whichever cloud provider you use, with RStudio Connect and scale
it up for production? So, like, if it's regards to setting up RStudio Connect on Azure,
that's, like, that's beyond my comprehension. That's something that the data engineers did.
But getting RStudio Connect to talk to our Azure data, like, like a storage container,
is super easy. And it's, it's the same for just, you know, doing it on your,
essentially, your local machine. So that's been something that's been kind of a surprise,
in that I can, I can use the pins package. So I can set up a pin board on RStudio Connect,
and I can set up another pin board on Azure Data Lake. So I can then use, like, the same pin
underscore get function to get data from the Data Lake and data from RStudio Connect.
But the way we eventually ended up doing it was using a package called Azure Store
from Microsoft employees, an open source package just on CRAN. And that's essentially how we read
the data currently into, into RStudio Connect. Just, you know, there's a couple of, it's like,
it's not a one liner, but like, in gap, but maybe three or four lines of code. So
it's been really, really nice. And sorry, and the key to that is like,
checking the environment variables in RStudio Connect. So don't store any, like, credentials
in your code. Thank you, Henrik. A few, all right, let's see, there's quite a few other questions
still here. What package do you use for the model? So this is like a super simple, like,
linear splines model. So essentially, the only packages we use for the modeling are just, you
know, it's probably stats that has the element function, and then the splines package, which has
the natural splines function. But then we used Yardstick from Type Models to just do the
evaluations of, of accuracy on the training data. Awesome, thank you. Is there a way to manually
remove the end data for, wow, and someone's going to make me pronounce this pool, lorgrislerg in R?
Let us say. Sorry, is there a way to? Is there a way to manually remove the in data?
If anyone, I know it's anonymous, but if anyone wants to add any other context, feel free to jump
into. So it's like, I think I understand the question. And the problem is that we, we can't
do it because what we see is like the difference between five minute intervals. So essentially, if,
if minus two people are recorded as the change between, let's say, 630 and 635, we have no idea
looking at the data to tell if that minus two is because, you know, nobody entered the pool,
but two people left, or if like 10 people entered the pool and 12 people left. So sadly,
the data doesn't allow us to do that.
Thank you. Could you let us know what other data science projects you currently are working on
or have planned other than the swimming pool and COVID dashboard?
Okay. So one of the things is estimating like the need for personnel at our call center.
That's something that's that we're working on. Although it's not a priority priority currently,
but there are like in-depth reports regarding just not like a COVID dashboard, but you know,
the economic variables regarding, you know, the effect of COVID. We have that.
It's both a report and we've done like a dashboard for that.
But essentially, like, like this 40 page R Markdown document that we update and then hand
into like city hall, essentially. And there are, we did this deep dive into like the costs of
essentially just, I don't know what the English term for this, but essentially like
if there are any special needs in, you know, school districts, and it was essentially
a deep dive into looking if there were unintended, essentially biases, if some
groups of students were being, getting more financing of special needs than others
and stuff like that. So it's, it's all kinds of things.
Awesome. Thank you. A great question here for others on the call who maybe are going
through the very beginning stages of this process. How did you get administration to
buy into RStudio Connect and how did you get around data protection issues?
So, like, this has a lot to do with Ole, who you saw earlier. He's now like a suit and tie
type of guy running things and, you know, as a manager. But I think like the key thing is that
he's like a PhD in statistics and has been using R since 2006. So he understood
the importance of allowing people with specialist skill sets to, like, use the tools that are most
suited for them. So he wasn't going to say, OK, but here's this other solution that, you know,
we can save a couple of bucks on, but, you know, you'll be out of your element. And I think it's
just not every place is going to have somebody that's moved upwards from being a data scientist
into the management role and then can influence decisions like that. But I think it has a lot
to do with just communicating, like, you hired us because we have these particular skill sets
and we're not, like, it's like this thing where, you know, somebody is an R programmer, but then
they come to this new place and they say, oh, like, can't you do this in Python? And then they
have to, like, become this subpar Python program instead of using their superpower of, you know,
having worked in R for, like, the last 10 years or whatever.
I just remembered I forgot to make an announcement earlier, and I apologize for that to the Lander
analytics team, but I did want to let everyone know that there's also an R in government
conference coming up soon. So I wanted to say that before a few other people have to run.
And the Lander analytics team is actually so kind to provide us a 20% promo code for anybody who
attended the meetup. So I'm going to share that on the meetup page as well. But the conference
is on December 9th and 10th. So I'll share the link in the chat window, too, if anyone wants
to check it out. But it seems like it would align very well with the meetup today and for a bunch
of people who are in the government space. But if anyone from Lander analytics is on and you want
to jump in and provide any more info, feel free to do so, too. And my bad for not saying that
earlier. I'll share the link in just a second. There's two other questions left. And I know you
touched upon this one a little bit, but it was for this project. What profiles were involved
into constructing all of this? Not only the data science team, but stakeholders and technical team.
Okay. Yeah. So the profiles meaning. I'm sorry.
I think they mean. So I'm assuming. So feel free to jump in. I know it was anonymous. But
thinking about this project specifically and getting that from zero to into production,
who were the stakeholders that you had to work with and who are the technical teams that you
had to work with to get that done as well? Okay. Awesome. Thank you. I'm showing you what
mess. No, I'm not sharing the screen. Okay. Thankfully. So the two big ones were like
at the Department of Sports and Leisure. There are like there is like a like a mini IT department.
And we essentially report to them, but they also help us with communicating to
vendors and partners of vendors. But then within the Department of IT, we also had to,
we needed to move the API requests to the like the centralized integration platform.
So there is a special, it's called web methods, this integration platform. So we had to
essentially deal with them. But they are perhaps not, perhaps not stakeholders, essentially, but
like comrades. But I think like the two largest stakeholders are essentially this like mini IT
team at the Department of Sports and Leisure and the managers of the swimming pools, because there
is a manager of each swimming pool, because these are like rather large establishments. And
because essentially, we are hoping to make their lives somewhat easier. Also,
the staff at the swimming pools, because like, provided this goes as planned, and people actually
start to look where it's crowded, you know, it's hopefully going to be more distributed
across all the pools. I'm not sure if that answered anything really, but it was my attempt at that.
I thought it was helpful to me. But feel free to unmute yourself if you have any follow up
questions on that too. One of these days, we'll all be in person and we'll feel more comfortable
all like talking as a group, maybe at a RStudio conference one day, we'll have these
birds of a feather groups again. The other question is, how did you communicate the need
for staff hours for future projects? So for example, with only six people right now in this
interest in data projects growing? Will you need to kind of advocate for more data scientists?
This is like, this is kind of, you know, the secret sauce of this project, is that it,
because it was agreed to before, like the workflow was finalized with regards to allocating,
you know, the resources of the data scientists. This has been kind of, you know, it's been,
it wasn't put in a box. Essentially, it wasn't, there wasn't some,
these are the man hours that are allowed to, and it's not like, but of course, that's also part of
the shortcomings of this project, because if it had been, you know, put in a box and just
scoped as a project, like we do now, now that we've moved into that phase of our operation,
it, we probably would have, like, ran into these, like, speed bumps much earlier,
instead of just, you know, accepting the project as is, and diving into it, and then it kind of
becoming a side project, because, you know, because it is a rather weird project. I'll
jump onto it when I have nothing else to do, and, you know, when, when there's like, oh,
you can get this data, or you can get this connection, like from the gyms and stuff like
that, I can, you know, I can kind of treat that as a side project with, sorry, with less oversight
than, like, the regular project, but at the same time, we, like, if we had put this into the
formalized process and scoped it, I'm sure we would have, like, because now it's been like,
okay, here's the problem we ran into, let's talk to the Department of Sports and Leisure,
and they'll go, oh, why don't you use, like, the secondary counter, let's try that, and we go, oh,
we didn't know there was a secondary counter, nobody had told us that, and when that doesn't
work, like, oh, why don't you, why don't you try the, like, the smart, you know, locks in the,
in Lødersle, and we're, like, oh, nobody, nobody told us that there were smart locks, so it's been,
like, a blessing and a curse that this has been kind of, like, a rather unofficial project,
so to speak. Thank you, Hunter, and just, you mentioning that, like, these side projects was
making me think about something, which I think is really cool that your team does on Fridays,
where you have, like, the chance to work on, like, anything that you want to,
and was curious if you could just tell us all a little bit more about that, too.
Like, I'm the least, like, you'll get the least interesting answer out of me, because, you know,
it's got to be this project. So, but, like, just to name, so, Thor, our data scientist, he's been,
like, focusing on getting up to speed with D3, and, you know, taking graphs that are, you know,
based on data in R, and then putting that into, like, a JavaScript to create a D3 plot, which is
something that he's passionate about. And it's going to be, like, a super nice thing for us
moving forward. Awesome. I also know that the team, part of the team's mission or information
you had shared with me probably a year back was that you want to hopefully be able to,
like, help other cities do something similar and kind of create maybe a working group among
other people using R and public sector, different data science teams. And I just wanted to open up
the conversation about that, if anybody wants to jump in, to really just see, like, what would be
the best way for us to all start to do that and be able to network with each other and share best
practices. I think the meetups are great for being able to, like, highlight different use cases and
ask questions. But I'm thinking, like, on a going forward basis, is that some kind of, like,
Slack channel or a LinkedIn group? What would be helpful to you all? Or what ideas do you have?
Yeah, just to, like, before, is anybody, I can't see if anybody's raising their hands.
Not yet. It seems like, like, some of that is going on in LinkedIn groups now, which I didn't
think was, it didn't seem like a viable solution to me some months ago. But a lot of things are
moving in that direction. I see Manju just recommended that as well. Maybe we could start
with testing that out, too, and just for people who joined this event as well, and to invite other
people going forward. Does anyone else have any other ideas for how to do that or how to better
connect people? Great. Do I want, that's a great point as well. There's also the,
I find the Slack channels on the R for Data Science online learning community really helpful,
too. And so, I will ask John, who moderates that, if we could create, like, a government
channel as well. Yeah, that'd be really, really cool. And that's, if anybody's not in that Slack
channel, you can always just join it by going, and I'll put the, I'll put the link in the chat
window, but it's just r4ds.io slash join. I see someone had unmuted, if you have anything else to
add, too. Yes, I also, nice to meet you. Thanks for your presentation today. And yeah, because I'm
kind of old school, but I think I prefer also face-to-face communication, meeting the person
who's working in that field and have this experience asking the question directly. But
those kind of art conference, maybe we can have that through this COVID. I'm not sure it's going
to disappear, but after it gets better, because one of the things that you posted, the art conference,
which is pretty expensive, and yeah, it's, to me, should it be worth it or not, because some
$100, more than $100. So I think it's better for us to have some kind of opportunity,
meeting people in the field and sharing the opinions of it.
Definitely, and hopefully we all will be able to meet at conferences again soon as well. But I do
think a really good thing that came out of the past two years as well with these virtual events
is that anybody can join and it's open to everyone and free of costs, obviously. But
if I can ever help be the middle person there introducing people, I'm also happy to do that.
So I'm a professional community manager here at RStudio. That's my new title as of six months ago.
So always feel free to reach out to me directly on LinkedIn or I'll put my email in the chat.
And I'd love to be able to help connect people. And maybe if that's a virtual coffee where we
have smaller group chats as well to talk about specific challenges that you're facing or,
I don't know, something specific like shiny optimization.
I'm happy to help set that up and organize it for people too.
I know we got into all the questions on Slido and we are definitely way over,
Leonard, so thank you so much for staying on and answering all the questions. I do want to just do
one last check to see if anybody else on has anything that you want to ask or things you'd
like to see or feedback as well. It'd be great to hear from you all.
I just want to say thank you so much, Leonard, for an awesome presentation.
It's so cool to be able to dive deeper into the core as well.
I just wanted to say, okay, just if anybody wants to talk on LinkedIn or whatever,
please add me and I'll answer any questions and learn from you and vice versa. So thanks, everyone.
Well, thank you so much, Leonard. Have a great rest of the day.
Really appreciate it and thank you all so much for joining.